[WIP] Install OpenFisca API with Ansible (#95)
openfisca/openfisca-ops: guides/Install-API-instance.md

## Requirements

The Ansible tool must be installed on a machine named [control node](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/network/getting_started/basic_concepts.html#control-node) in Ansible parlance that will install OpenFisca Web API on a [managed node](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/network/getting_started/basic_concepts.html#managed-nodes). The control node can be, for example, your development machine.

To install Ansible, check [its documentation](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/installation_guide/intro_installation.html).

To check that Ansible is well installed, try to run the following command:

```bash
ansible --version

# It should output something like:

# ansible [core 2.11.2]
#   config file = /etc/ansible/ansible.cfg
#   [...]
```

For information, during the redaction of this guide, we used Ansible version 2.11.2 with Python 3.9.4 (Ansible is written in Python). Note that the Python version used to run Ansible is not related to the [Python version recommended by OpenFisca Core](https://github.com/openfisca/openfisca-core#environment) (which is Python 3.7 at the time we write this guide).

> The Ansible _playbook_ is designed to be run on a managed node that runs [Ubuntu 20.04.2.0 LTS (Focal Fossa)](https://releases.ubuntu.com/20.04/), the latest long term support (LTS) version at the time the _playbook_ was written.

Reviewer: Let's not lock down version numbers too precisely in the documentation to avoid documentation rot 🙂 

```suggestion
The Ansible _playbook_ is designed to be run on a managed node that runs [Ubuntu 20 LTS (Focal Fossa)](https://releases.ubuntu.com/20.04/), the latest long term support (LTS) version at the time the _playbook_ was written.
```

## Configuration

> The default values of the variables used by the _playbook_ are defined in [`defaults/main.yml`](../ansible/roles/openfisca-api/default/main.yml).

Reviewer: From an end user point of view, it would seem more appropriate to me to explain how to change the values through an inventory instead of explaining where the _defaults_ values are stored 🙂

## Install OpenFisca Web API

The following sub-sections describe how to run the `openfisca-api` _playbook_ with 2 scenarios:

- on a remote server for production

> - on a local virtual machine (VM) for development

Reviewer: > I'm in favour of starting with the development scenario.

### Remote server scenario

This scenario describes how to install OpenFisca Web API on a remote server.

There are some prerequisites to running the _playbook_:

> - a server must be available, running [Ubuntu 20.04.2.0 LTS (Focal Fossa)](https://releases.ubuntu.com/20.04/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a server must be available, running [Ubuntu 20 (Focal Fossa)](https://releases.ubuntu.com/20.04/)
```

- it must expose an SSH connection
- the _control node_ (the machine that runs the _playbook_) must be able to access the server via SSH as `root`
- a domain name must have been created, and it must target the public IP address of this server

> The _playbook_ refers to the server using `openfisca_api`, a symbolic host name that does not necessarily correspond to a real server host name or domain name (cf `hosts` property in [`openfisca-api.yml`](../ansible/openfisca-api.yml)).

Reviewer: Do we really mean the “playbook” here, not “managed node”? 🤔

To associate a concrete IP address or domain name to that symbolic host name, we use an Ansible inventory that can define host groups with a symbolic name (i.e. `openfisca_api` in this case) targeting one or many concrete host names.

Inventories are stored as sub-directories of the [`inventories`](../ansible/inventories/) directory. Each inventory provides at least a `hosts` file, and can also overload _playbook_ default variables by providing a `group_vars/openfisca_api.yml` file.

> An SSL certificate is issued from Let's Encrypt if `enable_ssl` and `letsencrypt_email` variables are both defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An SSL certificate is issued from [Let’s Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org) if `enable_ssl` and `letsencrypt_email` variables are both defined.
```

To run the _playbook_, run the following command.

```bash

> ansible-playbook -i ansible/inventories/scaleway/ ansible/openfisca-api.yml

Reviewer: Do we really need to run the `scaleway` inventory? Should it not be rather the inventory that the user just created? 🙂

```

### Local VM scenario

> This scenario describes how to install OpenFisca Web API on a virtual machine (VM) managed locally on your development machine by [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/), a well-known open-source tool.

Reviewer: Let's try and avoid value judgements: if the reader does not know Vagrant, they should not be made to feel like they don't know something that is “well-known” 🙂 

```suggestion
This scenario describes how to install OpenFisca Web API on a virtual machine (VM) managed locally on your development machine by [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/).
```

To install Vagrant, check [its documentation](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/installation).

Vagrant relies on a [provider](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/providers) to create a VM. The recommended one is [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/), so install it by following [VirtualBox documentation](https://www.virtualbox.org/manual/UserManual.html#installation).

For information, during the redaction of this guide, we used Vagrant version 2.2.16 and VirtualBox 6.1.22.

To create the VM and run the _playbook_, just do:

```bash
# Ensure you are in the directory containing the Vagrantfile
cd openfisca-ops

vagrant up
```

> About a minute later, the command will finish, and you should have a VM with OpenFisca Web API running. Thanks to Vagrant port forwarding, the internal port 8000 inside the VM is forwarded to the port 80 of your development machine.

Reviewer: Let's not assume CPU and internet connection speed and set expectations too high 😉 
If it is the first use of Vagrant on that machine, the initial box download might be pretty long.

```suggestion
You should then have a VM with OpenFisca Web API running. Thanks to Vagrant port forwarding, the internal port 8000 inside the VM is forwarded to the port 80 of your development machine.
```

> To try the API, you must first associate the host name serving the API in your `/etc/hosts` file to the local machine, by adding this line:

Reviewer: This is not mandatory: one could connect to `0.0.0.0:8000/api/latest` and get access to the API without modifying their hosts file 🙂

Author: Hmm I don't think so: on my installation, because I use the Virtualbox Vagrant provider, the port `0.0.0.0:8000` corresponds to the forwarded port 80 inside the VM, which is listened to by nginx, which responds only when the host name is the one defined by the "vhost".

I think that maybe because you use the Docker Vagrant provider, you may have some port sharing (?)

Or maybe I'm missing something and I'd be interested to talk about it synchronously with screen sharing :)

```
ansible [core 2.11.2]
   …
```

## 3. Define access to the target machine

Ansible defines configuration of target machines in files constituting an _inventory_. In order to install the Web API on the correct target machine, you will need to write such an inventory.

Inventories are stored as YAML files in the [`inventories`](../ansible/inventories/) directory.

```yaml
# in ansible/inventories/YOUR_INVENTORY.yml
all:
  hosts:
    target.ip.or.domain.com:  # define here the target machine’s IP or domain name
      ansible_user: root  # define here the username to use when connecting over SSH
      # adjust the variables defined in `ansible/roles/openfisca_api_fr/defaults/main.yml` below:
      openfisca_api_fr_host_name: my-openfisca-api-instance.com
```

## 4. Install and start the API

1. Clone (or download) the `openfisca-ops` repository: `git clone git@github.com:openfisca/openfisca-ops.git`.
2. Navigate to the freshly downloaded folder: `cd openfisca-ops`.
3. Type the following command: `ansible-playbook --inventory ansible/inventories/YOUR_INVENTORY.yml ansible/site.yml`.

> Once the command is done, your target machine should run the OpenFisca France Web API. Just open `http://TARGET_MACHINE:8000/api/latest` in your browser. You can change the port and path through the configuration file.

Reviewer: Mention the `HOST_PORT` env var too 🙂

Author: Good idea :) I add it to the other guide dedicated to the Vagrant VM (`Serve-local-API.md`).
